update documentation for image datasets (#1148)
huggingface/hub-docs: docs/hub/datasets-image.md

# Image Dataset

> This guide will show you how to configure your dataset repository with image files.

Reviewer: Maybe we can still link to https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/image_dataset somewhere for advanced / programmatic use.

Author: Hmmm, not sure. The additional content would be the dataset script, and we don't mention it in the rest of the docs here, so... I would leave it unchanged

(edit: we have one mention of the script, I will remove it)

A dataset with a supported structure and [file formats](./datasets-adding#file-formats) automatically has a Dataset Viewer on its dataset page on the Hub. Any additional information about your dataset - such as captioning or object detection - is automatically loaded as long as you include this information in a metadata file (`metadata.csv`/`metadata.jsonl`).

## Only images

If your dataset only consists of one column with images, you can use a simple setup: store your image files at the root:

```
1.jpg
2.jpg
3.jpg
4.jpg
```

> or using subdirectories:

Reviewer 2: note that if there is more than one subdirectory, their names are by default treated as class names and a `label` column is added, as described in "Image classification" section below (this behavior can be changed by setting the `drop_label` parameter in readme's yaml but this is not relevant to this section). 
so maybe:
```suggestion
or in a subdirectory:
```

Author: Ohhhh you're right. Changed

> If your dataset only consists of one column with images, you can use a simple setup: store your image files at the root:
> 
> ```
> 1.jpg
> 2.jpg
> 3.jpg
> 4.jpg
> ```
> 
> or using subdirectories:
> 
> ```
> images/1.jpg
> images/2.jpg
> images/3.jpg
> images/4.jpg
> ```

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
If your dataset only consists of one column with images, you can simply store your image files at the root:

```
1.jpg
2.jpg
3.jpg
4.jpg
```

or use subdirectories:

```
images/1.jpg
images/2.jpg
images/3.jpg
images/4.jpg
```
````

Maybe it's also better to use the `tree` command's formatting for these file structures.

> Multiple [formats](./datasets-adding#file-formats) are supported at the same time, including png, jpg, tiff and webp.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multiple [formats](./datasets-adding#file-formats) are supported at the same time, including PNG, JPEG, TIFF and WebP.
```

```
images/1.jpg
images/2.png
images/3.tiff
images/4.webp
```

## Additional columns

If there is additional information you'd like to include about your dataset, like text captions or bounding boxes, add it as a `metadata.csv` file in your repository. This lets you quickly create datasets for different computer vision tasks like text captioning or object detection.

```
train/1.jpg
train/2.jpg
train/3.jpg
train/4.jpg
train/metadata.csv
```

Your `metadata.csv` file must have a `file_name` column which links image files with their metadata:

```csv
file_name,text
1.jpg,a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes
2.jpg,a green and yellow toy with a red nose
3.jpg,a red and white ball with an angry look on its face
4.jpg,a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face
```

> You can also use a JSONL file `metadata.jsonl`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use a [JSONL](https://jsonlines.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) file `metadata.jsonl`:
```

Just a suggestion, I feel that the jsonlines format is still not as popular as it deserves :)

> You can also use a [JSONL](https://jsonlines.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) file `metadata.jsonl`:

Reviewer 3: The `jsonlines` package is not that popular (and we don't use it internally to parse the metadata):

```suggestion
You can also use a [JSONL](https://jsonlines.org/) file `metadata.jsonl`:
```

```jsonl
{"file_name": "1.jpg","text": "a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes"}
{"file_name": "2.jpg","text": "a green and yellow toy with a red nose"}
{"file_name": "3.jpg","text": "a red and white ball with an angry look on its face"}
{"file_name": "4.jpg","text": "a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face"}
```

> Note that all the files must be in a directory that gives the split name (e.g. `train` or `test`, see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the image files and the metadata file for each split must reside in the same directory. The split name (e.g. `train` or `test`) will be taken from the directory name, see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information.
```

## Relative paths

> You can also locate the images in a different location than the metadata file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also locate the images in a different subdirectory of the split:
```

> Note that the image files and the metadata file for each split must reside in the same directory. The split name (e.g. `train` or `test`) will be taken from the directory name, see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information.

Reviewer 2: not sure if the first phrase is needed. below it says that it's possible to use relative path, so maybe join this section and the one below and say from the beginning that `file_name` must be a full relative path? this way it doesn't really matter where you put it (am i right, @mariosasko ?)

```
train/images/1.jpg
train/images/2.jpg
train/images/3.jpg
train/images/4.jpg
train/metadata.csv
```

To access the image, the `file_name` column should be a full relative path to the file, not just the filename:

```csv
file_name,text
images/1.jpg,a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes
images/2.jpg,a green and yellow toy with a red nose
images/3.jpg,a red and white ball with an angry look on its face
images/4.jpg,a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face
```

## Image classification

For image classification datasets, you can also use a simple setup: use directories to name the image classes. Store your image files in a directory structure like:

```
green/1.jpg
green/2.jpg

red/3.jpg
red/4.jpg
```

The dataset created with this structure contains two columns: `image` and `label` (with values `green` and `red`).

> You can also use provide multiple splits. To do so, your dataset directory should have the following structure (see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also provide multiple splits. To do so, your dataset directory should have the following structure (see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information):
```

```
train/green/1.jpg
train/red/3.jpg

test/green/2.jpg
test/red/4.jpg
```

> 

Reviewer 2: maybe it's relevant to say here that in cases when directories don't mean anything, this behavior can be changed by setting `drop_labels: true` in YAML:

```yaml
configs:
  - config_name: default
    drop_labels: true
```
with reference to `./datasets-manual-configuration` page to explain what yaml is.

Author: cool! I didn't know that. I'll add it

Reviewer 4: Do we need to specify the `data_files` in this case ? I recently found a dataset with the `sample_by` parameter and it required the `data_files` to be specified or the Viewer was considering it empty

Author: No it's not needed, see example 9 in https://huggingface.co/collections/datasets-examples/image-dataset-6568e7cf28639db76eb92d65 :P

## Parquet format

> Instead of uploading the images as files, along with a metadata file for the other columns, you can also embed them inside a [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) file. This case is useful if you have a large number of images, if you want to embed multiple image columns, or if you want to store additional information about the images in the same file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of uploading the images and metadata as individual files, you can also embed everything inside a [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) file. This is useful if you have a large number of images, if you want to embed multiple image columns, or if you want to store additional information about the images in the same file.
```

> Instead of uploading the images and metadata as individual files, you can embed everything inside a [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) file. This is useful if you have a large number of images, if you want to embed multiple image columns, or if you want to store additional information about the images in the same file.

Reviewer 2: do we already have some resource on how to convert a dataset to the parquet format? i think i've seen somewhere recently that you @severo worked on this, so if it's done, it's reasonable to link it here. or if not, maybe say that it's possible with the `datasets` library and link [this](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.15.0/en/upload_dataset#upload-with-python)?

Author: Yes, we have https://huggingface.co/datasets/jmhessel/newyorker_caption_contest/discussions/4. I plan to create a blog post to show this example, and we could link to it here?

> Instead of uploading the images and metadata as individual files, you can embed everything inside a [Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/) file. This is useful if you have a large number of images, if you want to embed multiple image columns, or if you want to store additional information about the images in the same file.

Reviewer 3: Parquet is also useful for storing data such as raw bytes, which is not supported by JSON/CSV.

Author: done

# Image Dataset

This guide will show you how to configure your dataset repository with image files.

A dataset with a supported structure and [file formats](./datasets-adding#file-formats) automatically has a Dataset Viewer on its dataset page on the Hub. Any additional information about your dataset - such as captioning or object detection - is automatically loaded as long as you include this information in a metadata file (`metadata.csv`/`metadata.jsonl`).

## Only images

If your dataset only consists of one column with images, you can simply store your image files at the root:

```

> .

Reviewer 4: for consistency with https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/datasets-manual-configuration
```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```

├── 1.jpg
├── 2.jpg
├── 3.jpg
└── 4.jpg
```

or in a subdirectory:

```

> .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```

├── images/1.jpg
├── images/2.jpg
├── images/3.jpg
└── images/4.jpg
```

Multiple [formats](./datasets-adding#file-formats) are supported at the same time, including PNG, JPEG, TIFF and WebP.

```

> .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```

├── images/1.jpg
├── images/2.png
├── images/3.tiff
└── images/4.webp
```

## Additional columns

If there is additional information you'd like to include about your dataset, like text captions or bounding boxes, add it as a `metadata.csv` file in your repository. This lets you quickly create datasets for different computer vision tasks like text captioning or object detection.

```

> .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```

└── train
    ├── 1.jpg
    ├── 2.jpg
    ├── 3.jpg
    ├── 4.jpg
    └── metadata.csv
```

Your `metadata.csv` file must have a `file_name` column which links image files with their metadata:

```csv
file_name,text
1.jpg,a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes
2.jpg,a green and yellow toy with a red nose
3.jpg,a red and white ball with an angry look on its face
4.jpg,a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face
```

You can also use a [JSONL](https://jsonlines.org/) file `metadata.jsonl`:

```jsonl
{"file_name": "1.jpg","text": "a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes"}
{"file_name": "2.jpg","text": "a green and yellow toy with a red nose"}
{"file_name": "3.jpg","text": "a red and white ball with an angry look on its face"}
{"file_name": "4.jpg","text": "a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face"}
```

Note that the metadata files must be stored inside directories that provide the split name (e.g. `train/` or `test/`). See [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information.

## Relative paths

You can also locate the images in a different subdirectory of the split:

```

> .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```

└── train
    ├── images
    │   ├── 1.jpg
    │   ├── 2.jpg
    │   ├── 3.jpg
    │   └── 4.jpg
    └── metadata.csv
```

To access the image, the `file_name` column should be a full relative path to the file, not just the filename:

```csv
file_name,text
images/1.jpg,a drawing of a green pokemon with red eyes
images/2.jpg,a green and yellow toy with a red nose
images/3.jpg,a red and white ball with an angry look on its face
images/4.jpg,a cartoon ball with a smile on it's face
```

## Image classification

For image classification datasets, you can also use a simple setup: use directories to name the image classes. Store your image files in a directory structure like:

```
.
├── green
│   ├── 1.jpg
│   └── 2.jpg
└── red
    ├── 3.jpg
    └── 4.jpg
```

The dataset created with this structure contains two columns: `image` and `label` (with values `green` and `red`).

You can also provide multiple splits. To do so, your dataset directory should have the following structure (see [File names and splits](./datasets-file-names-and-splits) for more information):

```

> .

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
my_dataset_repository/
```
